The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Lady Poverty, by Giovanni da Parma

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Lady Poverty
       A XIII. Century Allegory

Author: Giovanni da Parma

Translator: Montgomery Carmichael

Release Date: August 9, 2021 [eBook #66025]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Benjamin Fluehr, Turgut Dincer and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LADY POVERTY ***
TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE:


Italic text has been marked with _underscores_. Sidenotes, which are
used extensively for Scripture references, have been placed inside
{curly brackets}. Footnotes have been moved to the end of the text.




THE LADY POVERTY




“Sacrum Commercium Beati Francisci cum Domina Paupertate”

[Illustration:

  _Giotto._

_The Espousals of St. Francis to the Lady Poverty._]




The frontispiece of this volume is reproduced by permission from a
photograph by Messrs ALINARI of Florence.




                           THE LADY POVERTY

                       A XIII. CENTURY ALLEGORY

                        TRANSLATED & EDITED BY

                         MONTGOMERY CARMICHAEL

             WITH A CHAPTER ON THE SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE
                        OF EVANGELICAL POVERTY
                          BY FATHER CUTHBERT
                              O. S. F. G.

                                London
                     John Murray, Albemarle Street
                                 1901




CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION--

                                                   PAGE

    (a) Editions                                   xvii

    (b) Authorship and Date                      xxviii

    (c) Translation and Scripture References       xlii


              THE LADY POVERTY.

     I. In Praise of Poverty                          3

    II. How the Blessed Francis made diligent
         search for the Lady Poverty                  8

   III. How two old men showed the Blessed
         Francis where he might find the
         Lady Poverty                                14

    IV. Of the First Companions of the Blessed
         Francis                                     20

     V. How the Blessed Francis and his
         Companions found the Lady Poverty
         on the Mountain                             24

    VI. The Blessed Francis and his Companions,
         exalting her virtues in
         divers ways, beseech the Lady
         Poverty to abide with them forever          28

   VII. The Answer of My Lady Poverty                41

  VIII. Of the Apostles                              56

    IX. Of the Successors of the Apostles            59

     X. That Times of Peace are unpropitious
         to Poverty                                  62

    XI. Of Persecution                               65

   XII. Of the followers of a spurious Poverty       70

  XIII. Of Avarice                                   73

   XIV. How the Lady Poverty spoke of good
         Religious                                   77

    XV. How Avarice took the Name of
         Discretion                                  80

   XVI. How Avarice took the Name of
         Prudence                                    84

  XVII. How Avarice called in the aid of
         Sloth                                       89

 XVIII. Of the Religious who were conquered
         by Sloth                                    92

   XIX. How the Lady Poverty sorrowed
         over certain Religious who were
         poor in the World, and yet more
         prone than others to Self-indulgence
         in Religion                                 99

    XX. How the Lady Poverty showed the
         Blessed Francis the Perfect Walk
         in the Religious Life                      107

   XXI. How the Blessed Francis made
         answer to the Lady Poverty                 114

  XXII. How the Lady Poverty gave her
         consent                                    118

 XXIII. How the Blessed Francis thanked
         God for the consent of the Lady
         Poverty                                    119

  XXIV. Of the Sojourn of My Lady Poverty
         with the Brothers                          121

   XXV. How My Lady Poverty blessed the
         Brothers, exhorting them to persevere
         in the Grace which they
         had received                               130


 On the Spiritual Significance of
   Evangelical Poverty, by Father
   Cuthbert, O.S.F.C                                141


 APPENDICES--

     I. A Prayer of the Blessed Francis to
         obtain Holy Poverty                        183

    II. Paradiso. Canto XI. (lines 28-123)          200




INTRODUCTION




EDITIONS


The “Sacrum Commercium” is an Allegory, simple in form and charming in
conception, telling how St Francis wooed and won that most difficult
of all Brides, my Lady Poverty. It was written some time in the
thirteenth century (most probably in the year 1227) by an unknown
Franciscan, and has been six times printed, thrice in Latin, and
thrice in Italian.

{The Latin Editions.} The first Latin edition was printed at Milan in
1539. It is of exceeding rarity, and has escaped the vigilance of
Brunet and Græsse. Père François Van Ortroy, the noted Bollandist
(whom few things escape), was the first to call attention to a copy in
the Ambrosian Library, and it is the only copy known to exist. (See
“Analecta Bollandiana,” xix. 460.)

The second Latin edition was published nearly 400 years later, in 1894,
under the editorship of Professor Edoardo Alvisi, in the “Collezione
di Opuscoli Danteschi inediti o rari diretta da G. L. Passerini.”[1]
Professor Alvisi’s edition has no pretensions to being critical: his
sole object in publishing it was to supply an illustration to part
of Canto XI. of the “Paradiso.” This edition has, perhaps justly,
been decried for its entire want of critical apparatus, but it at
least served to call attention to a gem that had hitherto slumbered
uncared-for in parchment Codexes.

The third Latin edition is exceptional from every point of view. It
was published only last year by Père Edouard d’Alençon, the learned
Archivist General of the Friars Minor Capuchins. Père Edouard has
taken his version from a Codex (No. 3560) in the Casanatese Library
in Rome, which he has carefully collated with three other Codexes (of
Milan, Vincenza and Ravenna), noting all the variants at foot. There is
but one fault to find with this scholarly edition: it does not attempt
to give the numerous Scripture references.[2]

{The Italian Editions.} The first Italian edition[3] appeared in 1847
under the title “Meditazione sulla Povertà di Santo Francesco.”[4] It
is taken from a Fourteenth-Century Codex in the Franciscan Convent
of Giaccherino, near Pistoia. Its editors were the Lexicographer,
Pietro Fanfani, and a Canon of Pistoia, Enrico Bindi. It has been
quoted in the great “Vocabolario” of the Academicians of the Crusca,
and has therefore become a “Testo di Lingua” or Italian classic.[5]
The “Meditazione” is a very free translation indeed from the original
Latin. The translator adds beauties and leaves out obscurities at
will. It is curious to us in these days, when Franciscan studies
are being pursued with such avidity all the world over (if I except
England), to reflect that the editors, Fanfani and Bindi, did not know
whether the “Meditazione” was a translation or an original work. The
Fourteenth-Century translator is unknown.

The next Italian edition (1900) is the one given in parallel columns
with the Latin version of Père Edouard d’Alençon’s work above quoted.
It is taken from Codex B. 131 in the Vallicellian Library, and is
probably a Fourteenth-Century work, but, if interesting, it has little
or no merit as an example of fine Tuscan.

The third Italian edition is a much-needed and very welcome work.[6]
It is a reprint of the “Meditazione,” which has for long been so
scarce as to be almost unprocurable. The editor, Don Salvatore
Minocchi, a Florentine priest, and one of the foremost authorities on
matters Franciscan, than whom there could be no one more fitted for the
task, has carefully collated the original edition of the “Meditazione”
with the Codex from which it was taken, and has removed quite a host
of erroneous readings. We may therefore now be said to have, for the
first time, a correct version of this little Italian classic. It was
only printed in the last days of May, and I have to thank the learned
editor for courteously permitting me to see his proof sheets.




AUTHORSHIP AND DATE


The authorship of the “Sacrum Commercium” has been freely ascribed to
the Blessed Giovanni da Parma, seventh Minister General of the Friars
Minor in succession to Saint Francis. I would with all my heart that
he were the author, for Giovanni is one of the brightest lights of
the Order, and both by his love and practice of Poverty, and by his
great endowments, is the ideal author for so exquisite an allegory.
The “Chronica xxiv. Generalium,” which was completed in 1379, and
begun perhaps twenty years earlier, distinctly states that Giovanni
is the author (“quendam libellum devotum composuit quem intitulavit
Commercium Paupertatis”),[7] and this opinion was followed by all
succeeding old writers (except Fra Bartolommeo da Pisa, who makes no
attempt to assign authorship), and most moderns, including Professor
Alvisi, M. Sabatier,[8] Professor Umberto Cosmo,[9] and the latest
biographer of the Blessed, Fra Luigi da Parma.[10] But all the
Codexes which Père Edouard d’Alençon cites, as also a Codex in the
Bodleian and another in the Communal library at Siena, give the date
of composition as the month of July after the death of Saint Francis,
that is to say July, 1227. (_Actum est hoc opus mense Julii post obitum
Beatissimi Francisci, anno Millesimo ducentesimo vigesimo septimo ab
Incarnatione Domini Salvatoris Nostri Jesu Christi._) If this date
be correct, then the Blessed Giovanni could not have been its author,
for he was only born in 1208, and did not enter the Order until after
1230. There is the point that Mediæval scribes were given (like other
mortals) to making errors in dates, more especially when they were
in Roman figures, and these errors would have been propagated from
Codex to Codex. We have the well-known instance of the Mazarin Codex
No. 1743, where the erroneous date of 1228 led a distinguished French
critic to look upon the “Speculum Perfectionis” as the oldest biography
of St Francis. The date was probably 1318, and it will be seen how
easily a slip might be made between MCCXXVIII and MCCCXVIII.[11] But in
favour of the date of 1227 for the “Sacrum Commercium” we have not only
the fact that the date is written in words and not in figures, but
that the “explicit” distinctly states that it was finished in the July
after the death of St Francis. Such extreme precision does not leave
much room for error. Moreover, there is practically no serious internal
evidence against the date 1227. It is true that the Casanatese Codex,
at the beginning of Chap. iv. speaks of “_Sanctum_ Franciscum,” whereas
St Francis was not canonized until 1228. But this, even if some
refuse to translate it simply “the holy Francis,” and insist upon
“_St_ Francis,” I think it is fair to regard as the slip of a scribe,
more especially as the Vincenzian Codex gives “beatum” in the same
place, and both Italian versions have “beato.” There is, therefore,
no substantial reason why we may not regard the “Sacrum Commercium”
as written in 1227, and it is interesting to note that this little
allegory is thus the first book ever written on St Francis, for Thomas
of Celano’s “Legenda Prima,” was not completed until the following
year.[12]

There are, to my mind, two conclusive arguments, both adduced by
Père Edouard,[13] against attributing the authorship to Giovanni da
Parma. Fra Ubertino da Casale in a famous work[14] (“too famous,” it
might justly be called), finished in 1305, is the first writer who
expressly mentions the “Sacrum Commercium,” and he ascribes it merely
to “a certain holy doctor,” giving no name. Now Ubertino well knew
Giovanni (_ob._ 1289), and it seems impossible that he should not also
have known and celebrated the Blessed as the author of the “Sacrum
Commercium” had he really been so. Again Fra Salimbene da Parma (_ob._
1287 or 1290) knew the Blessed Giovanni intimately, and alludes to
him frequently in his Chronicle.[15] He even refers to writings of
Giovanni’s, but there is never a hint of the “Sacrum Commercium.” The
only theory on which it is possible to ascribe the authorship to Fra
Giovanni is so wild as scarcely to be worthy of mention. We should
have to suppose, seeing the unpopularity of the extremes of Poverty
in a certain section of the Order, that he was afraid to acknowledge
his work, and that he deliberately, and with much circumstance,
falsified the date to secure his anonymity. But the Blessed Giovanni
was not made of such poor stuff! He who endured hatred, persecution
and imprisonment, to some extent by reason of his zeal for the Lady
Poverty, was not the man to resort to so trivial a ruse. His deeds
were far more unpopular (with some) than ever this little allegory
could have made him.

Père Edouard d’Alençon, with much ingenuity, seeks to credit
Giovanni Parenti, St Francis’ immediate successor as Minister General
(1227-1233), with the authorship. He gives an instance tending to show
that there was a tradition that a Minister General had written the
work, and then he points to the similarity between “Joannes Parenti”
and “Joannes Parmensis.” All this proves his acumen and ingenuity, but
he is too severely scientific a scholar to advance a clever theory as
proof positive. For the present it is safest to admit frankly that the
author of the “Sacrum Commercium” is unknown, and to conclude with
Fra Ubertino da Casale that he was “quidam sanctus doctor hujus Sanctæ
Paupertatis professor et zelator strenuus.”




TRANSLATION AND SCRIPTURE REFERENCES


I have translated from Père Edouard d’Alençon’s version of the Codex
Casanatensis.[16] But I have not slavishly adhered to this, using,
when they seemed more apt, the variants which he has so diligently
noted at foot. I have also, now and again, used the Italian version of
the Codex Vallicellianus, and, though very rarely, even the classic
“Meditazione.” In my translation I have been no bondsman, but have
rendered freely, while seeking to convey accurately the spirit and
meaning of the work, and to preserve, as far as that might be, the
elemental simplicity of its language.

The “Sacrum Commercium” is a tissue of the words and phrases of St
Jerome’s beautiful Latin version of Holy Scripture. Where so much is
Biblical, I have had to a certain extent to adopt Biblical language,
but I have striven earnestly to avoid those excesses of Archaism which
irritate even the most equable nerves. With the help of Cardinal
Hugo’s “Concordantiæ Sacrorum Bibliorum” (may his name live for ever!)
I have endeavoured to give references to the principal quotations from
Holy Writ. Some will assuredly have escaped me, and I shall be grateful
to him who points out to me any omissions.

The reader must not forget that it was the Latin Vulgate which was used
by the author of the “Sacrum Commercium.” To be faithful, therefore,
I could not take my quotations straight from the “Authorised Version.”
I have translated sometimes after my own fashion, sometimes with the
help of the “Douay” version, but when the sense has allowed of it, I
have gladly adopted the noble English of King James’ Bible.[17]

       *       *       *       *       *

And now, _lector humanissime_, I am glad to have done with all
these dry details, necessary perchance to a right understanding of
the subject, and to leave thee free to hasten onward to the green
Pastures and still Waters of one of the fairest of Mediæval Idylls.
Feed in those fresh Pastures, dip in the restoring Waters: thou canst
not but gather therefrom health and strength, life, and the Life to
come; together with a right knowledge of the Past, a loving pity for
the Present, and a valorous good resolution for the Future.

                       VALE!

                                M. C.

  LIVORNO, _13th June 1901_.




THE LADY POVERTY




    “O amor di Povertade
    La tua gran nobilitade
    Chi potrìa gia mai narrare?”

    --_Jacopone da Todi._




  HERE BEGINNETH THE HOLY COMMERCE OF THE BLESSED FRANCIS WITH THE
  LADY POVERTY:




I

  IN PRAISE OF POVERTY[18]


Among the cardinal excelling virtues which prepare a place and mansion
for God in the Soul of Man, and show a more excellent and {1 Cor.
xii. 31.} a speedier way of approaching and attaining unto Him, Holy
Poverty shines resplendent in her authority, and excels all others
by her peculiar Grace. For she is the Foundation and Guardian of all
the Virtues, and holds the Primacy among the Evangelical Counsels.
Wherefore let not the other {Matt. vii. 25.} Virtues fear should the
rain descend, and the floods come, and the winds blow, threatening
destruction, if only they have been founded upon the Rock of Poverty.
And justly; for the Son of God, the Lord of Hosts and King of Glory,
loved this Virtue with a special love, sought this Virtue, found
her, and by her wrought Salvation {Ps. lxxiii. 12.} in the midst of
the Earth. Her, in the beginning of His preaching, He placed as a
Beacon to lighten those entering the Haven of the Faith, and as chief
corner-stone of His House. The Kingdom of Heaven which He promised
hereafter to all the Virtues, He openeth to Poverty even in this life.
For “Blessed,” He {Matt. v. 3.} has said, “are the Poor in Spirit, for
theirs _is_ the Kingdom of Heaven.”[19] They are worthy of the Kingdom
of Heaven who have freely renounced all Earthly Things out of Love and
Desire for Heavenly Things. He must needs live by Heavenly Things who
takes no thought of Earthly Things, and counts {Phil. iii. 8.} them
but as dung: even in this our Exile shall he feed on the honied crumbs
which fall from the table of the Holy Angels, that he may taste and
{Ps. xxxiii. 8.} see how sweet the Lord is. This is truly to find the
Kingdom of Heaven; ’tis the Pledge of an Eternal Mansion therein, and,
as it were, a foretaste of the Blessedness to come.




II

  HOW THE BLESSED FRANCIS MADE DILIGENT SEARCH FOR THE LADY POVERTY


Wherefore the Blessed Francis, as a true Follower and Disciple of the
Saviour, gave himself up from the beginning of his Conversion with all
his Heart, with all his Strength, and with all his Mind, to seek and
to find, to have and to hold the Lady Poverty, dreading no Adversity,
fearing no Evil, sparing no labour, shunning no suffering of the body,
so only that he might come unto her to whom the Lord had given the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. Like an eager explorer he began to go
about the highways and by-ways of the City, diligently seeking {Cant.
iii. 2.} her whom his Soul did love. He asked of those who stood
about, he questioned those who met him, saying: Saw ye her {Cant.
iii. 3.} whom my Soul loveth? But his speech was dark to them as an
alien tongue, and, not understanding him, they answered: We know not
what thou sayest: speak to us in our own tongue, and we will answer
thee. For there was not at that time any word or sign in the language,
by which the Children of Adam could discourse together of Poverty.
They hated her then as they hate her now, nor could they speak with
patience to one who sought her. So they answered him that this thing
was unknown to them, and that they had no knowledge of what he sought.
Then, said the Blessed Francis, I will go unto the Great and the Wise,
and ask them, for they know the Ways of the Lord {Jer. v. 5.} and
the Judgments of God. But these only answered him yet more roughly,
saying: What is this new doctrine which thou bringest to our {Acts
xvii. 20.} ears? May that Poverty which thou seekest always abide with
thee, and with thy children, and with thy seed after thee. As for us,
we had rather enjoy the delights of life and abound in riches, for the
span of our {Wisdom ii. 1.} Life is short and tedious, and in the end
of a man there is no remedy. Therefore we know nothing better than to
eat and {Luke xii. 19.} drink and be merry while there is still time.

But the Blessed Francis, hearing these things, marvelled in his Heart
and gave Thanks to God, saying: Blessed art {Matt. xi. 25.} Thou, O
Lord God, Who hast hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and
revealed them unto Babes. Even so, Father, for so it hath seemed good
in Thy Sight. O God, the Author and Ruler {Eccli. xxiii. 1.} of my
being, deliver me not over to their Counsels, nor suffer me to fall
into their iniquity, but give me Thy Grace, so that I may find what I
seek, for I am Thy servant, {Ps. cxv. 16.} and the Son of Thy Handmaid.




III

  HOW TWO OLD MEN SHOWED THE BLESSED FRANCIS WHERE THE MIGHT FIND THE
  LADY POVERTY


And the Blessed Francis, being come out of the City, made haste to
reach a certain field, in which, from afar off, he saw two old men
sitting, full of a heavy sorrow, the one of whom was saying: To whom
shall I look save to {Isa. lxvi. 2.} some Poor Little Man, contrite of
Heart, and who fears my Words? And the other: For we brought nothing
into {1 Tim. vi. 7, 8.} this World, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out of it. But having food and a covering to our Bodies, let
us be therewith content.

And when the Blessed Francis had come up with them, he said unto them:
Tell me, I beseech you, where the Lady Poverty dwells, where she
{Cant. i. 6.} feeds her flock, where she takes her rest at noon, for
I languish for the Love of her. But they answered him, saying: O good
Brother, we have sat here for a Time, and Times, {Dan. xii. 7.} and
half a Time, and have often seen her pass this way, {Apoc. xii. 14.}
and many were they who sought her. Many were they, once upon a time,
who walked in her train, but oft she would return alone and desolate,
unadorned by jewels or fine raiment, unescorted by any following. And
she would weep bitterly, saying: The {Cant. i. 5.} Sons of my Mother
have fought against me. But we did answer and say: Have {Cant. i.
3.} patience, for the Righteous love thee. And now, O Brother, ascend
the great and high Mountain whereon the Lord hath placed her. For she
dwelleth in the Holy {Ps. lxxxvi. 1, 2.} Mountains, because God hath
loved her more than all the tents of Jacob. Giants have failed to
follow her footsteps, and the Eagle to fly to the summit of her Hill.
Poverty is the one thing despised of all men, for it is not found in
the {Job xxviii. 13.} land of them that live in delights. Wherefore
she is hid {Job xxviii. 21, 23.} from the eyes of the Living, and
the fowls of the air know her not. But God understandeth her way; He
knoweth her Dwelling-place. If therefore, O Brother, thou wouldst
ascend unto her, put off the Garments of thy Pleasures, {Heb. xii. 1.}
and lay aside every weight and the Sin which besets thee, for unless
thou art free from these trammels, thou canst not attain unto her who
is placed at so great a height. But because My Lady is gracious,
she is easily seen by those who love her, and found by those who
seek her. To meditate upon her, Brother, is {Wisdom vi. 16.} perfect
Understanding, and whoso watcheth for her shall speedily be secure.
Take with thee trusty Companions that thou may’st profit by their
Counsel, and be sustained by their Help in the way, for woe {Eccl. iv.
10.} to him that is alone; when he falleth he shall have none to raise
him up. But do you uphold one another.




IV

  OF THE FIRST COMPANIONS OF THE BLESSED FRANCIS


And when he had heard these Counsels, the Blessed Francis chose unto
himself a few faithful Companions, with whom he set out for the
Mountain. And he said unto his brothers: Come {Isa. ii. 3.} ye, let us
go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the Lady Poverty,
that she may teach us her Ways, and we will walk in her Paths. And
when they beheld the Ascent from every side, and saw how exceeding high
and steep it was, they began to say one to another: Who shall ascend
this Mountain, and who shall reach unto the Mountain’s top? The which,
when Blessed Francis heard, he said unto them: Strait is the Way, and
{Matt. vii. 14.} narrow the Gate, which leadeth unto Life, and few
there be that find it. Be strong in the {Eph. vi. 10.} Lord, and in
the power of His Might, and all things difficult will become easy unto
us. Lay down the Burden of your own Will, cast away the heavy Weight
of your Sins, and gird yourselves like Strong Men. Forget those things
{Phil. iii. 13.} which are behind, and reach forth to those which are
before. I say unto you that every {Deut. xi. 24.} place that your
foot shall tread upon shall be yours. For as a Spirit before our face
is Christ the Lord, drawing us to the Mountain’s summit by the Bonds
of Charity. Wonderful, O Brethren, are the Espousals of Poverty, but
we may hope to enjoy her embraces, {Lament. i. 1.} for the Mistress
of Nations is become as a Widow, the Queen of all Virtues is become
contemptible. There is none in all the Land who dares call upon her,
none who will stand over against us, none who by right can forbid this
Blessed Union. All her {Lament. i. 2.} Friends have despised her, and
are become her Enemies.




V

  HOW THE BLESSED FRANCIS AND HIS COMPANIONS FOUND THE LADY POVERTY ON
  THE MOUNTAIN


And when he had thus spoken, they followed after the Blessed Francis.
And as with light feet they hastened to the summit of the Mountain,
they beheld my Lady Poverty on the topmost Pinnacle gazing down the
Mountain. And when she saw them climbing thus valiantly, nay, as it
were, rather flying towards her, she marvelled exceedingly, and said
to herself: Who are these that {Isa. lx. 8.} fly like the Clouds and
as Doves to their windows? It is long since I saw such as these, or
looked upon men so free from trammels. Therefore will I speak to them
of the things which I ponder in my Heart, lest, like the rest, they
should repent them of their hardy ascent when they behold the dizzying
abyss below. I know they cannot possess me without my consent, but I
shall find Favour before my Heavenly Father if I give them the Counsels
of Salvation. And behold a Voice spoke unto her, saying: Fear not,
Daughter of Sion, {John xii. 15.} for these are of the Seed which
the Lord hath blessed. He hath elected them in Charity {2 Cor. vi.
6.} unfeigned. So from the Throne of her Neediness, the Lady Poverty
presented them with {Ps. xx. 4.} Blessings of Sweetness, and said unto
them: Tell me the cause of your Advent, my Brothers, and why you hasten
thus speedily from the Valley of Tears to the Mountain of Light. Can
it indeed be that you seek me who am poor and needy, tossed by the
tempest, {Isa. liv. 11.} and bereft of all consolation?




VI

  THE BLESSED FRANCIS AND HIS COMPANIONS, EXALTING HER VIRTUES IN
  DIVERS WAYS, BESEECH THE LADY POVERTY TO ABIDE WITH THEM FOREVER


And the Blessed Francis and his Companions answered her, saying: Yea,
we have indeed come out to seek thee, Lady, and we beseech thee to
receive us in Peace. We desire to become the Servants of the Lord of
the Virtues,[20] for He is the {Ps. xxiii. 10.} King of Glory. We have
heard that thou art the Queen of the Virtues, and we have proved it by
experience. Wherefore, prostrate at thy Feet, we humbly beseech thee to
abide with us, and to light our Way to the King of Glory, as thou wast
unto Him the Way, when, a Day-Spring {Luke i. 78, 79.} from on High,
He humbled Himself to visit them that sat in Darkness and the Shadow
of Death. For we know that thine is the Power, thine the Kingdom, that
thou art constituted Mistress and Queen of the Virtues by the King of
Kings Himself. Therefore, we entreat thee, make Peace with us and we
shall be saved, and He will receive us through thee, Who through thee
did redeem us. Do but elect to save us, and we shall be made free. For
the King of Kings and Lord of Lords Himself, the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, desired thy Comeliness {Ps. xliv. 11.} and thy Beauty. When the
{Cant. i. 11.} King was at His Rest, rich and glorious in His Kingdom,
He left His House, and forsook His inheritance, the Glory {Jer. xii.
7.} and Riches of His House, and His Royal Seat, and sought {Ps. cxi.
3.} thee with gracious words. Great therefore is thy Dignity, and there
is none so exalted as thee, since He could leave all Angelic Delights
and the great Abundance of Celestial Virtues, to seek thee in the
nethermost parts of the Earth, in the miry {Ps. xxxix. 3.} Clay, in the
Darkness and the Shadow of Death. Thou {Ps. lxxxvii. 7.} wast hated
by all the Children of Men, and all fled at thy Coming, or strove, as
they could, to drive thee from them. And though some could not fly thee
altogether, yet not for that reason wert thou less hated and loathed by
them.

But then came the Lord, the Lord God, and took thee for Himself, and
lifted up thy Head among the Tribes of the people, crowning thee His
Bride, and exalting thee above the Highest Heavens. And although, of
a surety, many still hate thee, not knowing thy Virtue and thy Glory,
yet hast thou nothing lost thereby, for thou dwellest in Freedom in
thy holy Mountains, in the most firm habitation of the {Exod. xv. 17.}
Glory of Christ. Thus the Son of the Most High, having become a Lover
of thy Beauty, {Wisdom viii. 2.} dwelt only with thee in the World,
and found thee most faithful in all Things. Even before He left His
bright Realms for the Earth, thou hadst prepared Him a fitting place,
a Throne on which to sit, a Couch in which to rest, a most poor Virgin
from whom He sprung, and shone upon the World. At His Nativity thou
didst run to meet Him, so that He might find comfort in thee, and not
in soft places. Thou didst lay Him in a {Luke ii. 7.} Manger, as saith
the Evangelist, for there was no room in the Inn. And thus didst thou
always inseparably accompany Him, so that during His whole Life, while
He dwelt among Men, though the Foxes had {Matt. viii. 20.} Caves, and
the Birds of the Air Nests, He had no place to lay His Head. And when
He Who in the Past had opened the lips of the Prophets opened His own
Lips to preach, among the many things which He spake, He first praised,
first exalted thee, saying: Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, {Matt. v.
3.} for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. And when He chose Witnesses
to His Holy Preaching and to His glorious Work for the Salvation of
Man, He did not take rich Merchants, but poor Fisherfolk, that by
this choice He might show forth that thou wert to be loved by All.
And finally that thy Goodness, thy Greatness, thy Power, might be
made manifest to All, and how thou art above all the Virtues, and how
without thee there is no Virtue, and how thy Kingdom {John xviii. 36.}
is not of this World but from Heaven, thou alone didst remain with
the King of Glory when all His Elect and Beloved had fled from Him in
Affright.

Like unto a most dear Mistress and faithful Spouse, thou didst not
leave Him for an instant. The more He was despised by All, the more
didst thou cleave to Him. For if thou hadst not been with Him, He could
never have been so despised by All. Thou wast with Him when the Jews
reviled, the Pharisees scoffed, and the High Priests reproached Him.
Thou wast with Him when He was struck, when He was spat upon, when He
was scourged. He Who should have been reverenced by All, was derided by
all, and thou alone didst minister unto Him. Thou wast with Him unto
Death, {Phil. ii. 8.} even the Death of the Cross. And on the Cross
itself, His Body being stripped, His Arms extended, His Hands and Feet
pierced, thou didst suffer with Him, so that nothing did seem more
glorious in Him than thou.

When He ascended into Heaven, He left to thee the Seal of the Kingdom
of Heaven, that thou might’st seal the Elect, that whosoever should
aspire to Eternal Life might come to thee, pray to thee, and enter
by thee, for if he be not sealed with thy Seal, no man may enter the
Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore, O Lady, have compassion upon us, and seal
us with the Seal of thy Grace. For who is there so craven-spirited
and foolish as not to love thee with all his Heart, thee who hast
been chosen by the Most High, and prepared from all Eternity? Who is
there that does not reverence and honour thee, when He Whom all the
Heavenly Host adore hath clothed thee with such Honour? Who would not
readily adore thy Footsteps, to whom the Lord of Majesty so humbly
inclined, whom He so intimately embraced, to whom he was joined in so
great a Love? We therefore beseech thee, O Lady, by Him and through
Him, despise not our petitions {Antiphon at Compline in the Office of
the B.V.M.} in our Necessities, but deliver us at all Times from all
Dangers, O Glorious and ever blessed Lady!




VII

  THE ANSWER OF MY LADY POVERTY


To these Words my Lady Poverty, with joyful Heart, and cheerful
Mien, and most sweet Voice, made answer, saying: I confess to you,
my Brothers and most dear Friends, that from the moment you began
to speak, I was filled with Gladness and exceeding great Joy, for I
acknowledge your Fervour, and already know your Holy Intent; your words
are dearer to me than Gold and Precious {Ps. xviii. 11.} Stones, and
sweeter far than Honey and the Honeycomb. For it is not you that speak,
{Mark xiii. 11.} but the Holy Ghost that speaketh in you, and it is His
{1 John ii. 27.} Unction that inspires you in all the things which you
have spoken concerning the Most High King, Who by His Grace alone chose
me as His Beloved, taking away my Reproach {Luke i. 25.} among Men, and
glorifying me among the Highest in Heaven. Therefore I desire, if it
will not weary you, to tell you the story of my Estate. It is a long
Story, but not less useful, and will teach you how to walk with God and
please {Gen. v. 22.} Him, giving heed that you who wish to put your
hands {Luke ix. 62.} to the plough in no wise look back.

I am not new,[21] as many think, but old and full of years, knowing the
nature of Things, the Varieties of Creatures, the mutability of Time.
I know the vacillations of the Heart of Man, in part by the experience
of Ages, in part by subtlety of Nature, in part by the Merit of Grace.
In the beginning I dwelt in the Paradise of God, where Man was naked.
Or rather, I was in Man, and of his Essence when he was naked, walking
with him in that spacious Paradise, fearing nothing, doubting nothing,
thinking no Evil. I thought to have stayed with him forever, for he
had been created by the Most High, just, good, and wise, and placed
in a most beautiful and delectable Place. I was joyful exceeding,
entertaining him at all Times, for possessing Nothing, he belonged
wholly to God. But, woe is me, he succumbed to Evil, which had been
unknown from the beginning of the Creation, and the unhappy Spirit of
Evil, who, through Vainglory, had lost Wisdom, entered the body of a
Serpent because he could not inhabit Heaven, and treacherously assailed
Man, that like himself he might become a transgressor of the Divine
Law. Unhappy Man, giving ear unto his evil Counsellor, acquiesced and
consented, and having forgotten God, his Creator, followed the Example
of the first Transgressor. In the beginning, says Holy Writ, Man was
naked but not {Gen. ii. 25.} ashamed, for he was perfect in innocence.
But having sinned, he knew that he was naked, and being ashamed, he
hastily made himself an apron of the leaves of the fig-tree.[22]

When, therefore, I saw that my Companion had sinned, and was dressed in
leaves (for he had nothing else), I left him. And standing afar off, I
beheld him through my Tears, and waited for Him Who should save me from
Faintness of Spirit in so great {Ps. liv. 9.} a Storm. And suddenly
there came a Sound from Heaven {Acts ii. 2.} that shook the whole of
Paradise, and a most bright Light shone from Heaven. And I looked and
beheld the Lord of {Gen. iii. 8.} Majesty walking in Paradise in the
cool of the day, resplendent in ineffable Glory. A mighty Host of
Angels was in His Train, crying with a loud Voice: Holy, Holy, Holy,
{Isa. vi. 3.} Lord God of Sabaoth, the Earth is full of the Majesty
of Thy Glory. Thousands of {Dan. vii. 10.} Thousands ministered unto
Him, and ten thousand times a hundred thousand[23] stood before Him.
Then in Fear and Trembling, overcome with Dread and Amazement, my Body
chill, my Heart fast beating, I cried out of the Depths: {Ps. cxxix.
1.} Mercy, Lord--have Mercy! Enter not into Judgment with {Ps. cxlii.
2.} Thy Servant, for in Thy Sight shall no Man living be justified.
But He said unto me: Go, hide thyself for a while, until Mine Anger
be overpast. And {Isa. xxvi. 20.} straightway He called my Companion,
saying: Adam, where art thou? Who answered: I heard Thy Voice, {Gen.
iii. 9, 10.} and was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid myself.
Naked indeed! The man who {Luke x. 30.} went down from Jerusalem to
Jericho and fell among Thieves was stripped of this World’s Goods, but
Adam had been robbed of the Likeness of God. But that King Who is Most
High and yet most Gracious, awaited his Repentance, and gave him the
Opportunity of returning to Him. Yet in his wretchedness he inclined
his {Ps. cxl. 4.} Heart to evil Words, and to making excuses for Sin.
And thus he increased his guilt, and heaped up punishment, treasuring
{Rom. ii. 5.} up unto himself Wrath against the day of Wrath and
Revelation of the just Judgment of God. For he spared not himself nor
his seed after him, delivering up All to the terrible Curse of Death.

And all the Angels that were present condemned him, and the Lord cast
him forth {Gen. iii. 23.} from Paradise by a just but not less merciful
Judgment, and bade him return to the Earth from whence he was taken,
greatly tempering the Curse He had laid upon him. And being stripped
of his robe of Innocence, God made him garments of skins, therein
signifying that Death had come into the World. And when I saw my
Companion clothed with the skins of dead beasts, I left him altogether,
for he had been cast forth to multiply his labours, whereby he might
become rich. I went forth a {Gen. iv. 12.} fugitive and wanderer upon
the Earth, weeping and mourning exceedingly, and I found not {Gen.
viii. 9.} where to rest the sole of my Foot. When Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and the other Patriarchs, received in promise Riches and a Land
flowing with Milk and Honey, I sought Rest among {Eccli. xxiv. 11.}
them, but found none. A Cherub with a Flaming Sword {Gen. iii. 24.}
stood before the Gates of Paradise until the Most High came down from
the Bosom of the Father, Who sought me out most graciously. And when He
had fulfilled all those Things of which you have spoken, and desired to
return to the Father Who had sent Him, He made me a Testament to His
Elect, and confirmed it by irrefragable Decrees: Lay not up Gold nor
{Matt. x. 9.} Silver, nor Money. Carry neither Purse, nor Scrip, nor
{Matt. x. 10 and Luke x. 4.} Bread, nor a Staff, nor Shoes, nor two
Coats. And if any {Matt. v. 40.} Man will contend with thee and take
away thy Coat, let go thy Cloak also. And whoever {Matt. v. 41.} shall
compel thee to go a Mile, go with him other twain. {Matt. vi. 19.} Lay
not up unto yourselves Treasures upon Earth, where Rust and Moth doth
corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal. Take no {Matt. vi.
31.} thought, saying: What shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or
wherewithal shall we be clothed? And take no Thought of the Morrow, for
the Morrow will take Thought {Matt. vi. 34.} for itself. Sufficient
unto the Day is the Evil thereof. Whosoever doth not renounce {Luke
xiv. 33.} all that he hath, cannot be my disciple.... And many the like
sayings, which are all to be found in the Gospels.




VIII

  OF THE APOSTLES


All which Things the Apostles and all the Disciples most diligently
observed, nor did they ever fail to fulfil the Things they had heard
from the Master. They bore themselves as most valiant Knights and
Judges of the Earth, carrying the Message of Salvation everywhere,
the Lord working with them, and {Mark xvi. 20.} confirming the Word
with Signs that followed. They glowed in Charity, abounded in Piety,
and endured every Want, taking care that it should not be said of
them: These men preach but do not practise. Hence one of them speaketh
boldly, saying: For {Rom. xv. 18, 19.} I will not dare to speak of any
of those Things which Christ hath not wrought by me by Word and Deed,
and by the Power of the Holy Ghost. And yet another speaketh thus:
Silver and Gold have I {Acts iii. 6.} none. Thus did they, one and
all, in Life and in Death, exalt me by the highest Praises. And those
who heard these Masters, gave heed to their Preaching, selling all
their {Acts ii. 45.} goods and substance, and dividing them according
as every man had need. And they were all together and had {Acts ii.
44.} all things in common, praising God and having favour with all the
People. {Acts ii. 47.}




IX

  OF THE SUCCESSORS OF THE APOSTLES


{Acts ii. 47.} Wherefore the Lord increased daily such as should be
saved. Indeed for long the Truth of their Words remained among many,
more especially while the Blood of the Crucified Poor One, Jesus
Christ, was warm in their memory, and the Noble Chalice of His Passion
inebriated their Hearts. For if any of them sought to leave me at any
time because of my too great Rigours, they would remember the Wounds of
the Lord by which He made manifest His loving Compassion, and bitterly
repent of the Temptation, clinging to me more closely, and embracing
me more eagerly than ever. And I abode in them all, ever striving to
impress upon their Memory the Dolours of the Passion of the Eternal
King. So strengthened by my Words, they cheerfully encountered the
cruel Sword which shed their holy Blood. And this Triumph continued and
endured a long while, so that daily a thousand thousand were sealed
with the Seal of the Most High King.




X

  THAT TIMES OF PEACE ARE UNPROPITIOUS TO POVERTY


But alas! after a while Peace was made, a Peace more hurtful than
any War. In the beginning of that long Peace but few were sealed, in
the middle of it yet fewer, at the end fewer still. And behold! of a
surety in {Isa. xxxviii. 17.} this Peace is my Bitterness most bitter;
for All fly from me or drive me from them; by none am I sought, by
All forsaken. This Peace was the work of Enemies, not of Friends; of
Strangers, not of my Sons. I indeed nourished {Isa. i. 2.} and raised
up Sons, but they contemned me. In that Time when the Lamp of the Lord
{Job xxix. 3.} shone upon my Head, and I walked by His Light through
the Darkness, Satan was raging in many who were with me, the World was
enticing them, and the Concupiscence of the Flesh, so that many of {1
John ii. 15.} them ended by loving the World and the Things of the
World.




XI

  OF PERSECUTION


But the Crown of all the Virtues, and that is the Lady Persecution, to
whom the Lord, equally with me, delivered the Kingdom of Heaven, was by
my side, and in all things a faithful Helper, a strong Champion, and
a prudent Counsellor. She, when she saw any grow lukewarm in Heavenly
Charity, or forgetting it a while, or fixing their Hearts on Earthly
Things, she straightway sounded the Trump and moved her Armies, and
made their faces to be ashamed, that they might seek {Ps. lxxxii.
17.} the Name of the Lord. But now my Sister has left me, the Light
of my Eyes is not with me, for while my Sons are at rest from the
Persecutors, they are most cruelly torn by civil and intestine War,
envying each other, and struggling for the acquisition of Wealth and an
abundance of luxuries.

After a while some began to breathe again, and wished of their own
accord to walk in the right Road, which once they had walked in of
necessity. All these came to me with prayers and tears, and entreated
me to make a perpetual League of Peace with them, and to abide with
them as I formerly did in the days {Job xxix. 4.} of my Youth, when
the Lord was with me, and my Children were round about me. These were
men of virtue, peaceful men, without Rebuke before the Lord, constant
in brotherly Love, so long as they remained in the Flesh, poor in
Spirit, poor in this World’s Goods, rich in Holiness, abounding in
the Gifts of Heavenly Grace, fervent in Spirit, rejoicing in Hope,
patient in Tribulation, meek and humble of Heart, and keeping Peace
in their Souls, Harmony in their Ways, Steadfastness in their Hearts,
and a joyful Unity in their Walk through Life. These men were indeed
devoted to God, pleasing to the Angels, beloved of Men, unsparing to
themselves, merciful to Others, devout in Deed, modest in Demeanour,
cheerful of Countenance, earnest of Heart, humble in Prosperity,
high-minded in Adversity, temperate of Life, sober in Dress, sparing of
Sleep, modest and devout, shining before all Men in the Light of their
Good Works. My Soul was joined unto these my Sons, and there was one
Faith and one Spirit within us.[24]




XII

  OF THE FOLLOWERS OF A SPURIOUS POVERTY


{1 John ii. 19.} Finally there rose up among us Men who were not of us,
certain Sons of Belial speaking Vain Things, working Iniquity, calling
themselves Poor Men when they were not Poor, despising and dishonouring
me who had been loved with Whole-heartedness by those glorious Men of
whom I have spoken, following the Way of Balaam, the Son {2 Pet. ii.
15.} of Bosor, who loved the Wages of Sin, Men of a corrupt {1 Tim.
vi. 5.} Mind, devoid of Truth, supposing Gain to be Godliness, Men who
in assuming the Habit of Holy Religion, did not put on the New Man,
but sought to hide the Old. They derided their Elders, and in secret
scoffed at the Life and Character of those who had begun the Way of
Holy Conversation, saying that they were imprudent, merciless, and
cruel, and that I, whom these holy ones had taken into their Company,
was idle, empty, base, rude, lifeless, and feeble. ’Twas my great Rival
who zealously worked all this, hiding under a Sheep’s Clothing the
Cunning of a Fox and the Fierceness of a Wolf.




XIII

  OF AVARICE


Avarice was this Rival’s name, and she is the Immoderate Desire of
acquiring and holding Riches. But they called her by a holier Name,
so that it might not seem that they had abandoned me, by whose Gift
they had been raised from the Dust and lifted up out of the Mire. So
they spake gently of her to me, but there was Craft and Anger in their
Hearts. And though the Desolation of a City which is set upon a Hill
{Matt. v. 14.} cannot be hid, yet they gave her the Name of Discretion
or Foresight, though such Discretion were better named Confusion, and
such Foresight a pernicious Forgetfulness of all Good Works. And they
said unto me: Thine is the Power; thine the Kingdom: fear not. It is
good to use Charity and labour for Good Ends, to succour the Needy and
give to the Poor. But I answered: What you say is just, Brothers, but I
beseech you, consider {1 Cor. i. 26.} your Calling. Do not look back.
Do not come down {Matt. xxiv. 17.} from the house-top to take anything
out of your Houses, neither return back from the fields to take your
Clothes. Do not be busied about this World’s Affairs, nor be entangled
again in its Pollution, {2 Pet. ii. 20, 21.} which you have escaped
through the Knowledge of the Saviour. For those who are entangled
therein a second time must needs be overcome, and the latter End is
worse with them than the Beginning, if by a Pretence of Piety they
turn from the Holy Commandment which has been delivered unto them. And
after I had thus spoken, there arose a Dissension among them, for some
said that I was good and spoke the Truth, but others that I desired to
seduce them into following me, in that I was wretched, and wished to
make them wretched with me.




XIV

  HOW THE LADY POVERTY SPOKE OF GOOD RELIGIOUS


My Rival could not yet drive me out of their Land, for there were still
many Men among them in all the great Zeal and Charity of their First
Fervour, who assailed Heaven by their Cries, and penetrated to the
Throne of God by their Perseverance in Prayer, rapt in Contemplation
and despising all Things which were of the Earth. Then the {Eccli.
xxiv. 12.} Creator of All Things commanded me, and He Who created me
said: Let thy Dwelling be in Jacob, and thine inheritance in Israel,
and take thou Root in My Elect. All which Things I most diligently
obeyed. And while I abode with them, and we walked together on the
Royal Road, they became, on my {Wisdom viii. 10, 11.} account, of good
Repute among the People, and admirable in the Sight of the Mighty. They
were honoured by all Men, and reputed as Saints, though they could not
endure to be thus called, remembering what the Son of God had said: I
seek no {John viii. 50.} Glory from Man; therefore they refused all
Honour offered them by Men.




XV

  HOW AVARICE TOOK THE NAME OF DISCRETION


But whilst my Disciples were thus walking in so great Fervour of the
Love of Christ, Avarice, taking to herself the Name of Discretion,
spake and said unto them: Do not show yourselves so severe to Mankind,
nor thus contemn their Honours, but have a kindly Countenance for them,
and do not outwardly reject the Honours offered to you: be content to
do so inwardly. It is a good thing to have the Friendship of Kings,
the Acquaintance of Princes, the Intimacy of the Great, for if they
honour and venerate you, if they rise up to meet you, many seeing this
shall follow their Example, and be the more easily turned to God. And
my Friends, acknowledging these advantages, but not guarding themselves
from the Snare which {Ps. cxlii. 4.} had been set in the Way, in the
End embraced Honours and Glory with all their Heart. They thought
themselves to be inwardly such as they seemed outwardly, but they
gloried in the Praises they received, and were like the Foolish Virgins
without Oil, profitless servants upon the Earth. And Men who believed
them to be interiorly that which they seemed exteriorly, freely offered
them their Goods in Remission of their Sins. In the beginning they had
counted all these {Phil. iii. 8.} Things as dung, saying: We are Poor
Men and always desire to be Poor; we do not desire your goods but you.
We have Food and wherewithal {1 Tim. vi. 8.} to cover ourselves and
desire no more, for Vanity of {Eccl. i. 2.} Vanities and All is Vanity.
Wherefore the devotion of Men towards them increased still more, so
that many held in small Regard the Goods which they saw thus despised
of the Saints.




XVI

  HOW AVARICE TOOK THE NAME OF PRUDENCE


That cruel Enemy of mine, Avarice, seeing this, began to grow exceeding
angry, and to gnash her teeth, and in vexation of Spirit said to
herself: What shall I do? For all the World is going {John xii. 19.}
after her! I will take, said she, the Name of Prudence, and will speak
in their Hearts, and perchance they shall hear and consent. And she did
as she had said, speaking unto them humble words, and saying: What do
you here all {Matt, xx. 6.} the Day idle and making no Provision for
the Morrow? In what could it hurt you to have the necessaries of Life,
so long as you lack all Superfluities? For in Peace and Quietness could
you work out your Salvation and the Salvation of Mankind, if you were
supplied with all Things Needful to you. Therefore, while you have
Time, provide for yourselves and those who shall come after you, for
Men may not always be so generous to you, nor give you the customary
Gifts. It would be good for you to be always as you are, but that is
impossible, for God causes you daily to increase and multiply. Would
God reject you because you had Wherewith to give to the Needy, and
could remember the Poor, when He Himself has said: It is more blessed
to {Acts xx. 35.} give than to receive? Why, therefore, do you not
receive the Goods which are offered you, and not defraud the Givers
of their Eternal Reward? You need fear no harm from the possession
of Riches, so long as you account them as Nought. There is no Evil
in Things themselves, but only in the Soul of Man, for God {Gen.
i. 31.} saw All Things and they were good. To the Good, all Things
are good, all Things serviceable, for them All Things were made. O
how many having possessions use them evilly, which had they been
yours, would have been put to a good use, for holy is your Purpose,
holy your Desire. You do not wish to enrich your Relations who are
already rich enough, but simply to have All Things necessary, so that
your Conversation may be the more honest and orderly. These, and
similar things, she said unto them, and some having already a corrupt
Conscience, gave a ready Assent. But others turned a deaf ear to her
Sayings, and by shrewd Answers refuted her Reasoning, alleging, as did
also their opponents, Arguments from Holy Writ.




XVII

  HOW AVARICE CALLED IN THE AID OF SLOTH


But Avarice, seeing that she could not, unaided, attain her ends upon
my Disciples, changed her plan, that she might better fulfil her
Purpose. So she called in Sloth, who neglects to begin good Works,
or to finish those begun. And Avarice made a Treaty with Sloth, and
entered into a Compact with her against the Religious. They were not
intimate, these two, nor closely affined, but they readily made Common
Cause in Evil-doing, as formerly did Pilate with Herod against the
Messiah. And when their Plan was laid, Sloth began her Ravages, and
having given Assault with her Satellites, she entered the Domain of the
Religious, and by sheer Force carried off their Arms and extinguished
their Charity, reducing them to Tepidity and Sluggishness. And so, a
little also by Pusillanimity of Spirit, they became altogether dead of
Heart.




XVIII

  OF THE RELIGIOUS WHO WERE CONQUERED BY SLOTH[25]


After a While some of the Religious began to sigh most lamentably for
the Flesh-pots of Egypt which they had left behind, and ignobly to seek
what with noble Heart they had abandoned. They fretted at having to
walk in the Ways of God’s Commandments, and followed His Injunctions
with a barren Heart. They grew faint under their Burden, and for Want
of the Spirit could scarcely breathe. Compunction they rarely felt,
and never Contrition; at Obedience they murmured; their Thoughts
were Earthy, their Joy carnal, paltry their Sorrow and their Speech
imprudent, their Laughter easily provoked. Mirthful of Visage, their
Carriage full of Vanity, their Garments soft and delicate, carefully
cut, and still more carefully fashioned, they slept inordinately, ate
overmuch, and drank intemperately. Their talk was full of Jests, and
Railleries, and Idle Words. They engaged in Story-telling, changed the
Rule, disposed of Patronage, and were busily occupied about the Affairs
of the World. Of Spiritual Exercises there was no Care or Thought;
but rarely Exhortations to save the Soul; they had become lukewarm in
Celestial Things. In the Hardness of their Hearts they began to envy
one another, to provoke one another, to domineer over one another,
one Brother eagerly bringing the vilest Accusations against another.
They shunned Gravity, and sought false Sources of Joy, seeing that
they could not have the true. Nevertheless they kept up some show of
Sanctity, so that they might not be utterly despised, and by holy Talk
they sought to hide their wretched way of Life from the Simple. But
so great was the Ruin of the Interior Man, that, unable to contain
themselves, their evil Life burst forth in exterior Manifestations.
In short they began to fawn upon the World, striking bargains with
Worldlings that they might empty their Purses, and they enlarged their
Buildings and multiplied those Things which they had forever renounced.
They bartered their Words to the Rich, and their Courtesies to Noble
Ladies. They eagerly frequented the Courts of Kings and Princes, that
they might join House to House {Isa. v. 8.} and lay field to field.
And now they have become great {Jer. v. 27.} and rich, and have waxed
strong, because they have {Jer. ix. 3.} proceeded from Evil to Evil and
have not known God. They were cast down when {Ps. lxxii. 18.} they were
lifted up; they fell to the Earth before their Birth, and yet they say
unto me: We are thy Friends.




XIX

  HOW THE LADY POVERTY SORROWED OVER CERTAIN RELIGIOUS WHO WERE POOR
  IN THE WORLD, AND YET MORE PRONE THAN OTHERS TO SELF-INDULGENCE IN
  RELIGION


In my Sorrow I sorrowed all the more over certain Religious who had
been poor and contemptible in the World, and yet grew rich after
they had come to me. And when they had waxed fat and gross {Deut.
xxxii. 15.} beyond the rest, they spurned and derided me. They in the
World were thought unworthy of Life, being destitute through Need
and Hunger. Once they ate Grass and the Bark {Job xxx. 4.} of trees,
they were disfigured {Job xxx. 31.} by their Calamity and Misery,
and now they are not content with the Community Life, but separate
themselves without shame, eating of special Meats. Their Example in
this is hurtful to the rest, and, moreover, they aspire to Honour among
the Disciples of Christ, who in this World were held most worthy of
Contempt. They who often wanted for Barley-bread and Water, and were
glad to lie under the Hedges, were the Sons of the Ignorant and Mean
and Unknown, on a level with my own Wretchedness. Now they hate me
and fly far from me, and are not ashamed to spit in my face. I have
suffered Contumely and Terrors at their Hands, {Jer. xx. 10.} and those
who were my Friends and stood by my side have insulted me. They grew
ashamed of me, and cast me off all the more that they knew they had
been enriched by my Favours, so much so that they even scorned to hear
my Name.

{Jer. iii. 22.} In my Sorrow I sorrowed and said unto them: Return,
ye rebellious Children, and I will heal your Backslidings. Take heed
and beware of {Luke xii. 15, and Ephes. v. 5.} Avarice, which is the
Service of Idols, for the Avaricious Man shall not be satisfied with
{Eccl. v. 9.} Silver. Call to Mind your former Days in which, being
{Heb. x. 32.} illuminated, you endured a great Fight of Afflictions.
Do not be of them who draw {Heb. x. 39.} back unto Perdition, but of
them that believe to the Saving of the Soul. He who made void the
Law of Moses died {Heb. x. 28.} without Mercy under two or three
Witnesses. How much {Heb. x. 29.} more, think you, doth he deserve
sorer Punishment, who hath trodden under Foot the Son of God, and hath
accounted the Blood of the Covenant, by which he was sanctified, an
unclean thing, and hath done despite to the Spirit of Grace? Return,
then, ye Transgressors, {Isa. xlvi. 8.} search your Hearts, for a Man’s
life consisteth not in the abundance of Things which he possesseth.

{Job xix. 21, 22.} But they were angered, and said: Go to, depart from
us, thou miserable thing. We desire not the knowledge of thy Ways.
And I answered and said unto them: Have {Luke xii. 15.} pity upon me,
have pity upon me, at least, O ye, my Friends. Why do you persecute me
without a Cause? Did I not tell you that your Ways and mine would not
agree? It repenteth me that I have ever seen you.

{Cant. vi. 12.} And the Word of the Lord came to me, saying: Return,
return, O Shulamite, return, return, that we may look upon thee. These
are the Children of Wrath; they will not hear thee, because they will
not hear Me. Their Hearts have become stubborn and unbelieving; they
have departed and gone away, but they have not rejected thee without
rejecting Me. For thou hast {Jer. xiii. 21.} taught them against thee,
and instructed them against thine own Head, for if they had never
received thee, they would never have been made rich. They pretended to
love thee, so that having received thy Benefits, they might depart from
thee. Wherefore under adverse Temptation they have turned away, and
having laid {Jer. viii. 5.} hold on Lying, they would not return. Do
not again believe those that speak thee fair, for they despise thee and
seek thy Life. Do not offer Prayers or Hymns for them, for I will not
hear thee: I have cast them off because they have despised Me.




XX

  HOW THE LADY POVERTY SHOWED THE BLESSED FRANCIS THE PERFECT WALK IN
  THE RELIGIOUS LIFE.


{Prov. iv. 25.} Lo! then, dear Brothers, I have told you a long story,
so that your eyes may behold where you go, and that you may see what
you should do. It is perilous to look back and attempt to deceive God.
Remember Lot’s wife, and do not believe every Spirit. But I have {Luke
xvii. 32, and 1 John iv. 1.} confidence in you, dearest Brothers, for
I see better Things in you than in any others, and you are nearer to
Salvation. You seem to have abandoned Everything, and to have freed
yourselves from all Burdens. And the best proof is this, that you
have ascended this Mountain, which it is given to so few to do. But
I tell you, dear Friends, that the Wickedness of many others hath
made me suspicious of the Virtues of the Good, for I have too oft had
experience of ravening Wolves in Sheeps’ Clothing.

I desire that each one of you should become a Follower {Heb. vi. 12.}
of the Saints, who by Faith and Patience have come into my Inheritance.
But because I dread lest the Fate of others should overtake you, I give
you this salutary Counsel: that you should not in the Beginning aim
at the Higher and more Hidden Things, but that, setting Christ before
you, you should little by little come to the Highest. Take heed lest,
when the dung of Poverty has been laid about your Roots, you should
after all be found barren, for then there will remain nothing but the
Axe. Do not trust entirely to the Love which you now have, for Man is
more prone to Evil than to Good, and the Soul easily returns to former
Habits, even though it may long have been separated from them. I know
that with your great Fervour all Things seem easy to you. But remember
what is written: Behold they that serve Him {Job iv. 18.} are not
steadfast, and in His Angels He found Wickedness. At first it will seem
sweet to you to bear Anything, but after awhile, lulled in Security,
you will become careless of the Blessings you have received. You will
imagine that you can return to Him whenever you wish, and find the old
consolation. But the Spirit of Negligence, once admitted, is not so
easily got rid of. Your Heart will turn after other Things, but Reason
will call you to return to the Former Things. Lapsed into Sloth and
Idleness, Words of Excuse will rise easily to your Lips: We cannot be
strong as we were in the Beginning, and now the Times are changed; not
knowing that it is written: When a Man hath come to {Eccli. xvii. 6.}
his End then would he make a Beginning. For a voice will always dwell
in your Hearts, saying: To-morrow, and To-morrow, we will return to the
former Man, for it was better with us then than it is now. Behold, I
have foretold you many Things, my Brothers, and many other things have
I {John xvi. 12.} to say unto you, which ye cannot bear now. But the
Hour cometh when I shall {John xvi. 25.} speak to you plainly of All
Things.




XXI

  HOW THE BLESSED FRANCIS MADE ANSWER TO THE LADY POVERTY


And when my Lady had made an end of speaking, the Blessed Francis,
with his Companions, fell upon his Face, giving Thanks to God, and
said: Thy Sayings, O Lady, are well-pleasing unto us, nor in ought that
thou hast said can we find any Fault. All that we have {3 Kings x. 6.}
heard in our Land concerning thy Words and thy Wisdom, is most true;
nay, far greater is thy Wisdom than the Fame thereof. Blessed are thy
Servants and Disciples, who dwell forever with thee and hear thy Words
of Wisdom. May the Lord thy God, to Whom thou wast pleasing from all
Eternity, be forever blessed, Who loved thee and made thee Queen, that
thou mightest execute Judgment and Mercy on thy Servants. O how good
and how sweet is {Wisdom xii. 1.} thy Spirit, chastising the Erring,
and admonishing Sinners. Behold, O Lady, by the Love wherewith the
Eternal King did love thee, by the Love wherewith thou didst love Him,
we beseech thee do not despise our petition, but deal with us according
to thy Mercy {Wisdom xvii. 1.} and Loving-kindness. Great are thy
Works, and beyond the Tongue of man to tell, wherefore undisciplined
Souls fly from thee, for thou walkest alone in rocky Places, terrible
{Cant. vi. 3.} as an Army set in Array,[26] and Fools cannot dwell
with thee. But we are thy servants and {Ps. xcix. 2.} the Sheep of thy
Pasture Forever, and Forever and Ever, have we sworn and {Ps. cxviii.
106.} determined to keep the Judgments of thy Justice.




XXII

  HOW THE LADY POVERTY GAVE HER CONSENT


At these Words my Lady Poverty was deeply moved, and as her Property is
{Collect from the Litany of the Saints.} to have Mercy and spare, she
could restrain herself no longer, but having speedily embraced them,
and given to each the Kiss of Peace, she said: Behold, my Brothers and
my Sons, I will come with you, because I know that through you I shall
win many more.




XXIII

  HOW THE BLESSED FRANCIS THANKED GOD FOR THE CONSENT OF
  THE LADY POVERTY


But the Blessed Francis, beside himself for joy, began to praise
Almighty God with a loud Voice, for that He had not abandoned those who
trusted in Him, saying: Bless the Lord, all ye {Tob. xiii. 10.} His
Elect, keep Days of Rejoicing, and give Glory {Ps. cv. 1.} unto Him,
for He is Good and His Mercy endureth Forever. And coming down from the
Mountain they brought my Lady Poverty to the Place where they dwelt.
And it was about the Sixth Hour.




XXIV

  OF THE SOJOURN OF MY LADY POVERTY WITH THE BROTHERS


And when the Brothers had made all Things ready, they urged the Lady
Poverty to eat with them. But she said unto them: Show me first your
Oratory, the Cloister and Chapter House, the Refectory, Kitchen,
Dormitory, and Stables, your fine Seats and polished Tables and noble
Houses. For I see none of these Things, and yet I do see that you are
blithe and cheerful, abounding in Joy, filled with Consolation, as if
you expected all these Things to be supplied to you at will. But they
made answer and said: O Lady and Queen, we thy Servants are weary with
the long Journey, and thou in coming with us hast endured not a little.
Therefore, if it please thee, let us eat first, and thus refreshed, we
will do thy Bidding. And my Lady answered: It pleaseth me well. But
first bring Water that we may wash our Hands, and a Cloth wherewith to
dry them. And they brought forth a broken earthenware Vessel--for they
had no sound one--full of Water. And having poured the Water on her
hands they searched on all sides for a Cloth. But when none could be
found, one of the Brethren offered the Habit he wore, that therewith my
Lady might wipe her Hands. And giving Thanks she took it, magnifying
God with all her Heart Who had given her such Men as Companions.

And after this they led her to the Place where the Table was made
ready. But she looked round about, and seeing Nothing save three
or four Crusts of Barley-bread laid upon the Grass, she marvelled
exceedingly within herself, saying: Who ever saw the {Wisdom xii. 13,
18, 19.} Like in the Generations of Old? Blessed art Thou, O Lord God,
Who hast care of All, for Thy Power is at hand when Thou wilt, and Thou
hast taught Thy People, that by such Works they may please Thee. And
thus they sat a while giving Thanks to God for all His Gifts. Then my
Lady Poverty commanded them to bring in Dishes the Food which they had
cooked. But they fetched a Basin full of cold Water, that all might
dip their Bread therein, for here was there no abundance of Dishes or
superfluity of Cooks. My Lady Poverty then begged that she might at
least have some uncooked savoury Herbs, but having neither Garden nor
Gardener, the Brethren gathered some wild Herbs in the Wood, and placed
them before her. Who said: Bring me a little Salt, that I may savour
these Herbs, for they are bitter. But they answered her: Then must thou
tarry a while, Lady, until we go into the City to obtain it, if haply
there should be any one who would give us some. Then she asked them,
saying: Fetch hither a Knife that I may trim these Herbs, and cut the
Bread, which verily is hard and dry. Who answered: O Lady, we have no
Smith to make us knives. For the present, use thy Teeth in the place of
a Knife, and afterwards we will provide. Whereupon she said: Have you a
little Wine? To which they answered: No, Lady, we have no Wine, for the
necessaries of {Eccli. xxix. 28.} Man’s Life are Bread and Water, and
it is not good for thee to drink Wine, for the Spouse of Christ should
shun Wine as Poison.

And when they were satisfied, rejoicing more in the Nobility of Want
than if they had had an Abundance of All Things, they blessed the Lord,
in Whose Sight they had found such Favour, and led my Lady Poverty to a
Place where she might sleep, for she was weary. And she lay down upon
the bare ground. And when she asked for a Pillow, they straightway
brought her a Stone, and laid it under her Head. So after she had
slept for a brief space in Peace, she arose and asked the Brothers
to show her their Cloister. And they, leading her to the Summit of a
Hill, showed her the wide World, saying: This is our Cloister, O Lady
Poverty. Thereupon she bade them all sit down together, and opening her
Mouth she began to speak unto them Words of Life, saying:




XXV

  HOW MY LADY POVERTY BLESSED THE BROTHERS, EXHORTING THEM TO PERSEVERE
  IN THE GRACE WHICH THEY HAD RECEIVED


Blessed are you, my Sons, of the Lord who made Heaven and Earth, who
have received me into your House with such Fulness of Charity that
it seems to me as if, being with you, I had to-day been in Paradise.
Wherefore I am full of Joy and abound in Consolation, and I ask pardon
of you for having so long delayed my Coming. Verily the Lord is with
you, {Gen. xxviii. 16.} and I knew it not. Behold, what I longed for
I see, what {Antiphon at the Benedictus in the Feast of St Agnes.} I
desired I hold, for I am joined to them that are a type upon Earth of
Him to Whom I am espoused in Heaven. The Lord bless your Fortitude,
{Deut. xxxiii. 11.} and receive the Work of your Hands. I pray and
most earnestly beseech you, as most dear Sons, to persevere in those
Things which you have begun by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, not
abandoning your Perfection as is the Custom with some, but avoiding
all the Snares of Darkness, strive ever after Things more Perfect.
Most high is your Perfection, above Man and the Strength of Man, and
it excels in its Brightness the Perfection of your Forefathers. Have
no Doubt or Fear concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, for you already
hold the Earnest of Future {Eph. i. 14.} Inheritance and a Pledge of
{2 Cor. v. 5.} the Spirit, being sealed with the Seal of the Glory of
Christ, and are like in all things, by His Grace, to that first Company
of Disciples which He gathered about Him when He came into the World.
For that which they did when He was with them, you have done not seeing
Him, and you need not fear to say: Behold we {Matt. xix. 27.} have left
all Things and have followed Thee.

Let not the Greatness of the Fight, nor the Magnitude of the Labour
hinder you, for Great shall be your Reward. {Heb. x. 35.} Looking
unto the Author and {Heb. xii. 2.} Finisher of All Good Things, Our
Lord Jesus Christ, Who having Joy set before Him, endured the Cross,
despising the Shame, hold fast to the {Heb. x. 23.} Confession of your
Hope, without wavering. Run with Charity to the Fight that is before
you; run, too, with Patience which is most necessary to you, that by
so doing the Will of God you may receive the Promise. For God is able
by His Holy Grace to bring to a happy Consummation, the Work which
is above your Strength, because He is faithful to His Promises. Let
nothing be found in you pleasing to the {Eph. ii. 2.} Spirit of the
Children of Unbelief, let there be no Doubt or Hesitation, lest in
working their Wickedness against you, they convict you of Consent.
For it is a proud Spirit, but {Isa. xvi. 6.} its Pride and Arrogancy
are greater than its Strength. This Spirit is exceeding wrath with
you, and it will turn against you all the Arms of its Cunning. It will
seek to pour out the Venom of its Malice upon you, like one who in
fighting had thought all his Enemies vanquished, and now rages to see
you looking down upon him. All the Inhabitants of Heaven, O dearest
Brothers, rejoice exceedingly in your Conversion, and have sung a new
Song before the Face of the Eternal King. The Angels rejoice because
of you, for through you many shall continue Virgins, they shall be
resplendent in Chastity, and shall fill the empty places in the City on
High, where Virgins are established in especial Glory, for those that
neither marry {Matt. xxii. 30.} nor are given in Marriage are like the
Angels in Heaven. The Apostles exult at seeing their Life renewed, and
their Doctrine preached, and because you show an Example of the Highest
Sanctity. And the Martyrs exult, waiting to see their Constancy in
the Shedding of Blood made manifest in you also. The Confessors dance
before the Lord, knowing that their Victory in the Face of the Enemy
is often to be repeated in you. The Virgins who follow the Lamb {Rev.
xiv. 4.} whithersoever He goeth, likewise rejoice, knowing that by you
many will be daily added to their Number. The Whole Court of Heaven is
filled with Joy, for daily shall they keep the Festival of some new
Inhabitant, and because they shall be continually incensed with the
Odour of Holy Prayers ascending from this Valley of Tears.

{Rom. xii. 1.} Therefore, I beseech you, dear Brothers, by the Mercy of
God, for which you have made yourselves thus Poor, carry out that which
you have come to do, for which you left the Rivers of Babylon. Receive
in all Humility the Grace which has been given you, use it worthily in
All Things, and always for the Praise, Honour, and Glory of Him Who
died for you, Our Lord Jesus Christ, Who with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, liveth and reigneth, Victorious and Glorious, Eternal God, World
without End,


AMEN


  HERE ENDETH THE TREATISE CONCERNING THE LADY POVERTY AND OUR SERAPHIC
  FATHER, THE BLESSED FRANCIS.

This Work was done in the Month of July, after the Death of the Blessed
Francis, in the Year One thousand two hundred and twenty-seven after
the Incarnation of OUR LORD and SAVIOUR, JESUS CHRIST.




ON THE SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE OF EVANGELICAL POVERTY

BY

FATHER CUTHBERT, O.S.F.C.




  THE SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE OF EVANGELICAL POVERTY


“This is the sublimity of most high Poverty which has made you,
beloved brethren, heirs and kings of the Kingdom of Heaven.”[27] Thus
wrote St Francis of Assisi when he gave his disciples the Rule which
obliged them to “serve the Lord in poverty and humility.” It is easy to
recognise in these words the note of exultation and achievement which
made St Francis the most inspiring personality in Mediæval Christendom,
and which gives to his name, even to-day, a singular power over the
imagination of the Christian World. Clad in his peasant’s dress, and
with no possessions of his own in the world save his soul and body,[28]
he is nevertheless the man rich in all things that are of vital
interest, the clear spiritual vision, the perfect joy, the encompassing
sympathy, which gathers all palpitating life into its own. Francis
_lived_, if ever a man lived. His was the liberty of soul which finds
the joy of life in all Creation.

Artificial stimulus and transient excitement could add nought to
the Joy that was his. To him the sky and the earth, the sun and the
flowers, the fields and all living things, spoke with articulate speech
of the life that is in them. As for his fellow-men, their life was his
life. He had come to pass beyond the bounds of his own personality, and
to enter into that spiritual communion with all living things, whereby
man escapes from his own limitations, and the world lives in him as he
in the world. And above all, and yet in all, he beheld the ever blessed
God, the Author of all life that is. To Francis, God was ever present
in the Creation, the Life behind all life. “The Heavens show forth
the Glory of God, and the Firmament declareth the Work of His Hands.”
The intimate relationship binding creation to its Creator was to him
an abiding perception; he could not think of Earth apart from Heaven,
nor of finite man apart from the Infinite God. Whatever was good and
beautiful was to him an indication of the Divine Goodness and Beauty,
a portal of the Eternal Kingdom; and with keen spiritual intuition he
discovered the good and the beautiful, where men of lesser sensibility
would only find the commonplace and the material. “To them that love
God, all things work together unto Good;”[29] the truly spiritual man
discovers the imprint of the Divine Life along all the highways and
byways of Creation: just as the poet’s eye discovers beauty in the
woodland through which the ordinary wayfarer passes unheeding.

Thus the whole creation poured into the Soul of Francis an unceasing
stream of spiritual life, and with the inflowing life came joy--joy
unutterable; and sorrow too. For life as it is, has no joy altogether
separate from pain. There is tragedy in the purest romance, death even
where there is life. And so the “joyous troubadour of God” sorrowed
much because of the shadow that lay across the sunshine. To him
personally life was joy, such was his liberty of spirit; but it was not
so to all men. Many are they to whom life is sorrow; they walk as in a
dark valley with but the twilight around them; nay, at times with no
light at all, but only darkness, and their souls are starved for lack
of light and warmth; even when in their ignorance or despair they seek
pleasure in the immediate objects of sense around them. For these he
sorrowed with the sorrow of Christ weeping over Jerusalem. It was a
sorrow which kept him at long vigils when the world lay asleep, praying
for mercy for the souls of men. Yet this sorrow could not destroy the
essential joy of life which was his in a super-eminent degree. He
sorrowed as many a man and woman sorrows over a friend who is deprived
of the happiness which is their own.

Truly was Francis a “King and heir of the Kingdom,” if Kingship means
sovereign possession; for he found what is best in life and had it as
his own, nought else than the very joy of life. Francis himself has
told us how this joy of life came to him with the absolute renunciation
of what the world at large holds most dear--wealth, place, and power.
In renunciation he found spiritual freedom, and with it joy. No man is
truly joyous whose joy does not spring from his own soul, or from that
inalienable possession of the world which comes of spiritual communion
with what is good and true in it, and therefore Eternal.

The joy which is dependent upon the possession of the merely visible
and material can never reach the inmost spirit of man, even were such
possession not, at best, uncertain and of its nature transitory. Nay,
the joy of life, which springs from man’s own spirit, is impossible
to him whose heart is set upon the merely external world. For the
spiritual and the material are in the immediate aspect a simple
antithesis; so that where the one is, the other cannot be. “You
cannot serve God and mammon.” You cannot satisfy your nature with the
transitory, and yet retain an appetite for the Eternal. Consequently,
he who would be free and retain a relish for the life of the Spirit,
must beware of the lust of the earth, and keep a detached heart towards
what is of its nature unspiritual.

To St Francis, a man amongst men, the lust of the earth was radically
allied with pride of class, an inordinate ambitiousness of glory, and a
love of luxury. Poverty, as Francis understood it, meant the antithesis
of all this. The Lady Poverty (to borrow the Saint’s own imagery) was
an outcast; she was the despised of men; and she walked amid the rough
ways of the earth with threadbare garments and bruised feet.

The story how Francis found his ideal bride and came to love her with
chivalric devotion, is too well known to need repetition. The final
act in the drama came when one day, riding in the plain before Assisi,
he was met by a leper who besought an alms, and, filled with disgust,
he at first thought to pass on, but, moved by a nobler impulse, cast
himself from his horse, and not only gave the alms, but folded the
leper to his breast and embraced him. From that moment he himself has
told us that “what had seemed bitter was changed into sweetness of soul
and body, and not long afterwards I left the world.”[30]

The embrace of the leper marked the final abandonment in Francis’ soul
of the sense of separation between himself, the son of the wealthy
Bernardone, and the outcasts of society. Henceforth to Francis, the
poor and the outcast were human brethren, worthy of a brother’s
intimate love and care. In the same moment he cast aside, once for
all, his youthful dream of entering the ranks of chivalry, and seeking
renown in battle and tournament. Henceforth he would be the servant of
his brothers the poor, and “serve the Lord in Poverty and Humility.”

The path of renunciation was further determined for him when his new
ideal of life clashed with the commercial interests of his family.
In the newly-awakened consciousness of his kinship with the poor, he
considered his share in the family business as their share, and freely
parted with what he had a right to consider his own. Pietro Bernardone,
his father, foresaw commercial ruin from such a course, and when he
found that Francis was indissolubly wedded to his ideal, promptly
disinherited him. Henceforth Francis was without house or property of
his own. With the keenness of a soul set free, he at once recognised
in his father’s act of disinheritance the charter of his spiritual
freedom. “Now in truth can I say: Our Father Who art in Heaven!” Heaven
and earth became his when in the moment of abandonment he called God
his Father. Thus he cast from himself forever the three dominant
tyrannies which in his own age and since, have oppressed the souls of
men--wealth, place, and power. He had become in very truth the Poor Man
of Assisi, and yet who was richer than he?

Never did Francis regret his renunciation, but ever did the thought
of it fill him with gratitude and joy. One day, some years after his
disinheritance, the Saint and one of his disciples, Brother Masseo,
were eating a scanty meal of broken bread, begged by the way; they
ate near a fountain, and a large stone was their table. “O Brother
Masseo,” said Francis, his soul bubbling with joy, “we are not worthy
of so great a treasure;” and he repeated these words several times.
Brother Masseo answered: “Father, how canst thou talk of a treasure
where there is so much poverty and indeed a lack of all things? for we
have neither cloth, nor knife nor dish, nor table, nor house; neither
have we servant nor maid to wait upon us.” Then said the Saint: “And
this is the very reason why I look upon it as a great treasure, because
man has no hand in it, but all has been given us by Divine Providence,
as we clearly see in this bread of charity, in this beautiful table of
stone, and in this clear fountain.”[31] Surely here we find the very
apotheosis of poverty; of the poverty which, discarding the artificial,
is happy in the simple realities and in the bounties of nature, and
feels no barrier between itself and the spiritual possession of the
very earth itself.

Here it may be as well to take note how alien is the poverty of Francis
from the vulgarity and squalor, the idleness and discontent, which
mark too frequently the life of the poor. No greater misconception of
Franciscan poverty could there be than to conceive it as sanctioning or
condoning any condition that detracts from the proper native dignity
of man. The “Lady Poverty” of Francis went with bare and bruised feet,
her garment was coarse, and she ate but the bread of the peasant; but
she retained her native dignity of soul, and bore herself as a Queen
wherever she went. She delighted in the pure air, and the flowers, and
the running stream, was honest and self-revering, simple and joyous.

The poverty of our city slums where hearts break in discontent, and
souls are starved for lack of spiritual intelligence--such was not
the poverty of Francis’ dream. To use again his own manner of speech,
this is poverty in slavery, degraded and dishonoured by the vice and
selfishness of man. With a full heart would he have set himself to
rescue his Ideal from her modern degradation and restore her to her
place of honour upon the earth. Knight-errant as he was, he would not
have rested until poverty was made honourable amongst men. To rescue
the poor from the conditions which have so effectually demoralised them
during the past two or three centuries of unheeding individualism,
would undoubtedly have been to Francis a first and urgent duty were
he with us to-day. Even in his own time he regarded with anxiety the
conditions which debased the poor; even then he considered himself the
knight-errant sent to rescue the comely maiden Poverty from the neglect
and heartless scorn of the world.[32] But was ever Italian peasant so
utterly degraded as are many of the victims of modern industrialism?
Poverty with Francis was the mother of spiritual freedom; poverty in
the London slum is synonymous with hard materialism and irreligion.
Was ever contrast greater? And yet Francis has made evident to us that
beneath the squalor and degradation of the modern city, there is a
spiritual possibility, if only it can be recovered. But will it ever
be that poverty shall again regain amongst the hungry multitude the
honourable estate with which the Saint of Assisi had endowed it? Will
it ever be rescued from its present inhuman conditions? The future only
can tell; and they who strive that it shall be so can only work in the
strength of their faith; but faith verily can accomplish the apparently
impossible, if faith itself be strong. Meanwhile the ideal of Francis
has assuredly a prophetic message for the multitude which is not hungry.

Poverty, as Francis preached it, is an integral element in the
Christian life. Christianity imperatively demands of all its followers
an acceptance of the truth which Francis embodied so wonderfully in
himself. No one can enter the Kingdom of Heaven unless he be as Francis
was, a lover of Poverty. Such is the Gospel. “Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.”[33] There are those
who so interpret this beatitude as to empty it of all significance
concerning material possessions. The meaning of Christ, however, is
made clear, by His own earthly life and by the lives of His early
disciples. “Poverty of Spirit” means nothing less than detachment of
heart from the possession or achievement of material gain, and from its
attendant pleasures. No man can be a disciple of Christ who is not free
from the moral slavery which wealth and temporal possessions so easily
set upon the soul. To no man is given the spiritual insight and vision
which alone can bring rest eternal to man’s spirit, unless he have
first put from him the lust of the earth. And according to the measure
of his detachment is spiritual achievement possible.

Is then every man to imitate St Francis of Assisi, and cast off all
wealth and become dependent upon the labour of his hands or the charity
of his neighbour? No such claim is made by Francis, for it was not
made by Christ. If Christ demanded of the young man that he should “go
and sell what he had and give it to the poor” in order to follow Him,
He also acquiesced in the rich Zacchæus keeping his wealth so long as
he did not neglect his duty to those in need. Francis, too, following
the Divine Model, gave no injunction to the Lord of Chiusi or to the
Lady Giacoma to renounce their property, and he expressly forbade his
friars, who like himself gave up all right of possession, to judge
those who have possessions. No, it is not the holding of property, but
the selfish misuse of it and the inordinate desire of material gain and
its pleasures, which is opposed to the virtue of evangelical poverty.
In few words may the Christian precept of poverty be set forth: Let
no man set his heart on any material possession for its own sake, or
for the mere holding of it; if a man is lacking in this world’s goods,
let him not fret nor complain, but seek rather the life of the spirit.
If, on the other hand, he is endowed with this world’s goods, either
by inheritance or as the result of honest labour, let him bear in mind
that such goods are not absolutely his own; they belong, in the first
instance, to God, the Master of all, and may rightfully be used and
distributed only subject to the Divine laws of justice and charity. No
man has an absolute ownership before God, so that he may satisfy his
own whim or pleasure without consideration for what is due by Divine
Law to his fellow-men. Possession in the sphere of conscience is
stewardship. The rich are God’s stewards, appointed to “give to every
man his just measure in due season.” Such briefly is the precept of
Evangelical Poverty--a precept which has no direct connection with any
theory of social economics, but is based upon the fundamental law of
religion, that only the poor in spirit are spiritually free and capable
of citizenship in the realm of eternal life.

Assuredly to us who live our lives upon the pulse of a great industrial
empire, this message of the Poverello comes with a distinctness not
to be passed unheeded. As a race we are a prosperous people, and
money-making is our first preoccupation. Luxuries are easily within
our grasp; cheap luxuries, perhaps, which is all the worse, for that
very cheapness is a snare blinding us to the fact that what we indulge
in is a luxury. In money-making and luxury lie the elemental dangers
to our spiritual life. “Money,” says Cardinal Newman, “is a sort of
creation, and gives the acquirer, even more than the possessor, an
imagination of his own power, and tends to make him idolise himself.
Again, what we have hardly won we are unwilling to part with; so that a
man who has himself made his wealth will commonly be penurious, or, at
least, will not part with it except in exchange for what will reflect
credit on himself or increase his importance. Even when his conduct
is most disinterested and amiable (as in spending for the comfort of
those who depend on him), still this indulgence of self, of pride, and
worldliness insinuates itself.” And he adds: “If such be the effect of
the pursuit of gain on an individual, doubtless it will be the same on
a nation; and if the peril be so great in the one case, why should it
be less in the other?”[34] The enduring strength of a nation, as of an
individual, depends upon moral fibre and spiritual vision. If these be
destroyed no nation can long remain save as a warning to the nations
that shall come. Undoubtedly there are strong tendencies amongst us
towards the worship of wealth and its attendant luxuries and towards a
selfish accumulation of wealth beyond all possible needs, tendencies
which acquire strength with the growth of empire and trade. Well for us
is it that at this time Francis of Assisi is becoming widely known. To
all who revolt against the vulgar materialism which dominates so much
of our present life, Francis of Assisi is as a prophet sent by God.
Standing against the dark background of Avarice and Luxury which had
already infested the growing commercial centres of the mediæval world,
he throws the light of his own clear personality into the dark corners
of our own life.

We yearn, many of us, for a deeper spiritual life; we sorrow because
the joy of life seems flitting ever further and further away from this
complex social organism of ours. We seek direction, and the Poverello
is here to lead us; and the way he leads is that of detachment and
renunciation. But his own personality and life are an assurance to us
that the renunciation he preaches, leads to richer gain; he leads us
through death, only that we may find life even here, in some measure,
upon the earth, and in the fulness of the spirit hereafter. Thus and
not otherwise does he interpret to us the Poverty of Christ.


  FATHER CUTHBERT, O.S.F.C.

  Crawley, Feast of St Anthony
  of Padua, 1901.




APPENDICES




APPENDIX I

  A PRAYER OF THE BLESSED FRANCIS TO OBTAIN HOLY POVERTY.


O Lord Jesus! Show me the ways of Thy dearly-loved Poverty. I know
that the Old Testament was but a Figure of the New. In the Old, Thou
hast promised that “every place that your foot shall tread upon, shall
be {Deut. xi. 24.} yours.” To tread under foot is to despise; Poverty
treads all Things under foot, therefore she is the Queen of all Things.
But, O my dear Lord Jesus, have pity upon me and upon my Lady Poverty,
for I am consumed with Love for her, and can know no rest without her.
Thou knowest all this, my Lord, Thou who didst fill me with the Love
of her. But she sitteth in sadness, rejected of all; she, the Mistress
of Nations, is become as a Widow; the Queen of all Virtues is become
contemptible; {Lament. i. 1.} and sitting upon a dunghill she lamenteth
that all her friends have despised her and have become her enemies; for
long now she knows them to be wantons and no Spouses of hers.

Remember, O Lord Jesus, that Poverty is so much the Queen of the
Virtues, that Thou, forsaking the dwelling-place of the Angels, didst
descend upon Earth in order to espouse her in Love Everlasting, and so
as to bring forth in her, and by her, and through her, all the Children
of Perfection. And she clung to Thee with such Fidelity, that even
within Thy Mother’s womb she paid Thee homage, for Thy Infant Body was,
it is thought, the smallest of all. And at Thy Birth she received Thee
in a Holy Manger and Stable; and in Thy Life upon Earth she so deprived
Thee of all things, that Thou hadst no place where to lay Thy Head. And
as a faithful Helpmeet she followed Thee loyally when Thou didst go
forth to do battle for our Redemption, and in the Agony of the Passion
she was Thy only Armour-bearer. When Thy Disciples denied Thee and
fled, she alone did not leave Thee, but was Thy faithful Companion with
all the host of her Princes.

Even Thy own Mother (who alone did faithfully honour Thee, and with
grievous Sorrow share Thy Passion), even she, I say, could not by
reason of the height of the Cross, reach up unto Thee, but the Lady
Poverty in all her Penury, like a most dear Servitor, did there hold
Thee in an ever closer embrace, and join herself more and more nearly
to Thy Sufferings. For the which reason she did not wait to smooth
Thy Cross, nor to give It even the rudest preparation; nor, it is
thought, did she even make sufficient Nails for Thy Wounds, nor sharpen
or polish them, but furnished three only, all rough and jagged and
blunted, to support Thee in Thy Martyrdom. And when Thou wast dying of
a burning Thirst, Thy faithful Spouse was careful lest Thou shouldst
have one drop of Water even, and by the hands of the impious Soldiery,
prepared Thee a Cup of such bitterness, that Thou couldst only taste,
but not drink of it. And in the close Embrace of this Thy Spouse, Thou
didst yield up the Ghost.

But so faithful a Spouse was not absent at Thy Burial and would not
suffer Thee to have anything of Thy own, either Sepulchre or Ointments
or Linen, for these were all borrowed from others. Nor did she fail to
be present at Thy Resurrection; for rising gloriously in her Embrace,
Thou didst leave behind in the Sepulchre all those things which had
been borrowed. And then Thou didst take her up into Heaven with Thee,
abandoning all earthly things to those that are of the Earth, and
bequeathing unto the Lady Poverty the Seal of the Kingdom of Heaven,
wherewith she might seal the Elect who desire to walk in the Way of
Perfection.

O who would not love the Lady Poverty above all things! Of Thee, O
Jesus, I ask to be signed with this Privilege; I long to be enriched
with this Treasure; I beseech Thee, O most poor Jesus, that, for Thy
sake, it may be the Mark of me and mine to all Eternity, to possess no
thing of our own under the Sun, but to live in penury upon the goods of
others, so long as this vile body lasts.


AMEN.


NOTE

This remarkable prayer figures as the composition of St Francis in
all the editions of his works from Wadding (Antwerp, 1623) to Fra
Bernardo da Fivizzano (Florence, 1880). But we have (unfortunately)
no satisfactory or scientific proof that the prayer was really the
composition of the Seraphic Patriarch. Wadding took it from Ubertino
da Casale “Arbor Vitæ Crucifixi Jesu” (Venice, 1485). Ubertino wrote
his redoubtable book in 1305, and though he puts this prayer into the
mouth of St Francis, the context points to the fact that he is rather
attempting to reproduce the sentiments of the Saint, than giving a
prayer literally written by him. And his indebtedness to the “Sacrum
Commercium” is obvious. But whether written by St Francis or not,
there can be no doubt that when he prayed, he often prayed after this
fashion. It most faithfully reflects his spirit and ideas, and is
admirably illustrative of the “Sacrum Commercium.” For this reason we
have given it a place in the Appendix. It is also interesting as being
the probable source whence Dante drew his beautiful idea that the Lady
Poverty was more privileged than the Blessed Virgin, insomuch as she
followed the Lord up on to the very Cross itself:

    “_Si che, dove Maria rimase giuso,
      Ella con Cristo salse[35] in su la croce._”

The naïve sublimity of the concluding petition of the prayer “et
alienis rebus semper cum usus penuria, dum vivit caro misera,
sustentari,” is most characteristic of the Saint, not only in its
sentiment but in its Franciscan directness. It strikes strangely upon
modern ears to hear a Divine petition that certain men may ever be
known as men who lived upon others. But it is logical, as Francis
always was. There can be no evangelical poverty with possessions, and
yet man must keep body and soul together; hence mendicancy is the only
resource of the real lovers of my Lady Poverty. This sentiment recalls
the famous saying of St Francis in the Fifth of his “Collationes
Monasticæ”: “There is a compact between the World and my Brothers. They
owe it a good example, and the World in return must provide them with
all necessities. But if the Brothers, breaking faith, cease to give
their good example, the World will, with justice, withdraw its helping
hand.”

Very interesting, and of considerable importance, is the fact that this
Prayer speaks of Christ being crucified with three nails only. Whether
St Francis wrote the prayer or not, we may take this to have been his
opinion, for it seems to have been the common opinion of the thirteenth
century. And bearing in mind this opinion of his, it becomes impossible
to attribute the phenomena of his Stigmata to subjective causes, or to
that which is loosely called hysteria. The Stigmata of St Francis were
not merely open wounds, but showed nails of a black fleshy substance,
one in each hand and one in each foot. If these Stigmata had been the
result of intense meditation on the Passion, then, seeing what his
opinion was, the singular phenomena which were developed in him, would
have shown one nail only for the feet, and not a nail in either foot.
The point is of capital importance to investigators of a remarkable
occurrence which, while proved beyond a doubt as a matter of fact, has
hitherto found no scientific explanation.




APPENDIX II.

PARADISE--CANTO XI.

LINES 28-123

_Dean Plumptre’s Translation_


It is probable that Dante knew the “Sacrum Commercium”; it is certain
that he knew the Prayer to obtain Poverty. Therefore it may be
convenient to give _in extenso_ that part of the Divine Canto which
sings of the Mystic loves of Francis and the Lady Poverty.

    The Providence,--which all things doth dispose                    28
    With such deep counsels that all mortal gaze
    Is baffled ere to that great depth it goes--
    That unto Him she loves might bend her ways,                      31
    The Bride of Him Who, with a bitter cry,
    Espoused her with the blood we bless and praise,
    In fuller peace, more steadfast loyalty,                          34
    Her, for her good, with two high chiefs endowed,
    That they on either side her guides might be.
    The soul of one with love seraphic glowed;                        37
    The other by his wisdom on our earth
    A splendour of cherubic glory showed.
    Of one I’ll speak; for, if we tell the worth                      40
    Of one, ’tis true of both, whiche’er we take,
    For to one end each laboured from his birth.
    Between Tupino and the streams that break                         43
    From the hill chosen by Ubaldo blest,
    A lofty mount a fertile slope doth make;
    Perugia’s Sun-gate from that lofty crest                          46
    Feels heat and cold; Nocer’ and Gualdo pine
    Behind it, by their heavy yoke opprest.
    On this slope, where less steeply doth incline                    49
    The hill, was born into this world a sun,
    Bright as this orb doth oft o’er Ganges shine.
    Whence, naming this spot, let not any one                         52
    Call it Ascesi--that were tame in sense--
    As Orient doth its proper title run.
    Such was his rise, nor was he far from thence,                    55
    When he began to make the wide earth share
    Some comfort from his glorious excellence;
    For he, a youth, his father’s wrath did dare                      58
    For maid, for whom not one of all the crowd,
    As she were death, would pleasure’s gates unbar.
    And then before court spiritual he vowed                          61
    _Et coram patre_--marriage-pledge to her,
    And day by day more fervent love he showed.
    Of her first spouse bereaved, a thousand were,                    64
    And more, the years she lived, despised, obscure,
    And, till he came, none did his suit prefer.
    Nought it availed that she was found secure                       67
    With that Amyclas when the voice was heard
    Which made the world great terror-pangs endure;
    Nought it availed that she nor shrank nor feared,                 70
    So that, when Mary tarried yet below,
    She on the Cross above with Christ appeared.
    But lest I tell it too obscurely so,                              73
    By these two lovers, in my speech diffuse,
    Thou Poverty and Francis now mayst know.
    Their concord and their looks of joy profuse,                     76
    The love, the wonder, and the aspect sweet,
    Made men in holy meditation muse,
    So that the holy Bernard bared his feet,                          79
    The first to start, and for such peace so tried,
    That slow he thought his pace, though it was fleet.
    O wealth unknown, true good that doth abide!                      82
    Ægidius bared his feet, Sylvester too,
    Following the Bridegroom, so they loved the Bride.
    Then went that Father and that Master true                        85
    With that his Bride and that his family,
    Who round their loins the lowly girdle drew;
    Nor was faint heart betrayed in downcast eye,                     88
    As being Pietro Bernardone’s son,
    Nor yet as one despised wondrously;
    But like a king his stern intention                               91
    To Innocent he opened, who did give
    The first seal to that new religion.
    Then, when the race content as poor to live                       94
    Grew behind him, whose life, so high renowned,
    Would, in Heaven’s glory, higher songs receive,
    With a new diadem once more was crowned                           97
    By Pope Honorius, from on high inspired,
    This Archimandrite’s purpose, holy found.
    And after that, with martyr zeal untired,                        100
    He, in the presence of the Soldan proud
    Preached Christ, and those whom His example fired;
    And finding that that race no ripeness showed                    103
    For their conversion, not to toil in vain,
    He to Italia’s fields his labours vowed.
    On the rough rock ’twixt Tiber’s, Arno’s, plain,                 106
    From Christ received he the last seal’s impress,
    Which he two years did in his limbs sustain.
    When it pleased Him, Who chose him thus to bless,                109
    To lead him up the high reward to share
    Which he had merited by lowliness,
    Then to his brothers, each as rightful heir,                     112
    He gave in charge his lady-love most dear,
    And bade them love her with a steadfast care;
    And from her breast that soul so high and clear                  115
    Would fain depart and to its kingdom turn,
    Nor for his body sought another bier.
    Think now what he was who the fame did earn                      118
    To be his comrade, and for Peter’s barque
    On the high seas the true path to discern.
    And such was he, our honoured Patriarch;                         121
    Wherefore, who follows him as he commands,
    Him laden with rich treasures thou mayest mark.




By M. CARMICHAEL.

IN TUSCANY.

TUSCAN TOWNS--TUSCAN TYPES--THE TUSCAN TONGUE, ETC.

_With numerous Illustrations._

SECOND EDITION.

Crown 8vo. 9s. nett.


  Printed at
  The Edinburgh Press,
  9 & 11 Young Street.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] “Nota al Canto XI. (versi 43-75) del ‘Paradiso’ di Dante
Alighieri,” Città di Castello, Lapi, 1894, pp. 54.

[2] “Sacrum Commercium Beati Francisci cum Domina Paupertate, Opus
Anno Domini 1227 conscriptum ad fidem Variorum Codicum MS. Adjuncta
versione Italica inedita, curante P. Eduardo Alinconiensi, Ord. Min.
Capuccinorum Archivo Generali Præposito.” Rome, Kleinbub, 1900, 4to,
pp. xviii-52.

[3] The Italian edition of the Chronicle of Mark of Lisbon (Venice,
1590, voi. ii. pp. 82-92) contains a compendium of the “Sacrum
Commercium” which, however, does not merit the name of an edition.

[4] “Meditazione sulla Povertà di Santo Francesco” Scrittura inedita
del Secolo XIV. Pistoia, Tip. Cino., 1847, 18mo. pp. 72.

[5] See “Bibliografia dei Testi di Lingua a Stampa citati dagli
Accademici della Crusca, opera di Luigi Razzolini ed Alberto Bacchi
della Lega,” 4th Edition. Bologna, 1890.

[6] “Le Mistiche Nozze di San Francesco e Madonna Povertà. Allegoria
Francescana del Secolo, xiii.” Florence, 1901, 12mo. pp. xxiv-70. I
cannot help regretting that Don Minocchi has given the work a title
of his own choosing, though I recognise the superiority of his title
as title. As the “Meditazione” it was christened by the original
translator, as the “Meditazione” first published by Fanfani and Bindi,
and as the “Meditazione” it has become a Tuscan classic under the ægis
of the Crusca.

[7] “Analecta Francescana,” vol. iii. p. 283. Ad Claras Aquas
(Quaracchi) 1897, 4to.

[8] “Speculum Perfectionis,” p. vi., Paris, 1898. But then he is only
following Alvisi.

[9] “Le Mistiche Nozze di Frate Francesco con Madonna Povertà,”
Florence, Olschki, 1898, pp. 58. I have since seen his _Noterelle
Francescane_, in the “Giornale Dantesco” (An. ix., Quad, iii.) in which
he modifies his opinion.

[10] “Vita del Beato Giovanni da Parma,” 2nd Edition. Quaracchi, 1900,
pp. 186.

[11] _Cf._ the “Miscellanea Francescana,” vol. vii. p. 182.

[12] Add to all this that the “Sacrum Commercium” contains not a single
citation from the Office of St Francis--which it is natural to suppose
that the imaginative writer would have here and there availed himself
of--and it seems to me that the date of 1227 is proved with something
like certainty, and the date of 1247 excluded beyond a doubt.

[13] _Op. cit._ p. xii. and p. 41 et ss.

[14] The “Arbor Vitæ Crucifixi Jesu,” Venice, 1485, fol.

[15] “Chronica Fratris Salimbene Parmensis.” Parma, 1857, 4to, pp.
xiv.-424.

[16] Let me here render him public thanks for his courteous permission
to do so, and make due public acknowledgment of my indebtedness to his
critical preface. Had it not been for this scholarly work I must needs
have spent months in puzzling out for myself the crabbed hands and
crooked abbreviations of three or four fourteenth-century scribes.

[17] My references to the Psalms are according to the notation of
the Vulgate. Perhaps it may be necessary to state for the benefit
of readers not well acquainted with the Vulgate, that “Eccli.” is a
reference to Ecclesiasticus or the Wisdom of Jesus the Son of Sirach,
and not to Ecclesiastes (Eccl.) or the Wisdom of the Preacher.

[18] This chapter is wanting a title in all the Codexes. I have taken
the liberty of styling it “In Praise of Poverty.”

[19] In contradistinction, _e.g._ to the Meek who _shall_ possess the
Land (Matt. v. 4). Only the persecuted for Justice’s sake have the same
immediate privilege as the Poor in Spirit (Matt. v. 10). We shall see
later on that Persecution is the noblest and most helpful of all the
Lady Poverty’s sisters.

[20] Though the Author here quotes Psalm xxiii. 10, “Dominus Virtutum,”
he is, from the context which follows, obviously not referring to the
Lord of Hosts or Sabaoth, nor to the Virtues as one of the Orders of
Angels, but to God as the Lord of the Moral Perfections.

[21] “Non sum rudis,” I am not raw or new, says the Writer, quoting
Matt. ix. 16: “Nemo autem immittit commissuram panni rudis in
vestimentum vetus”: No man putteth a piece of new or raw cloth into an
old garment.

[22] So that Man’s first transgression after his original Sin, was,
by this, his first acquisition of property, a Sin against the High
Doctrine of the Lady Poverty.

[23] King James’ Bible has “ten thousand times ten thousand.”

[24] There is in a part of this Chapter so intricate an interweaving of
Pauline phrases, that I make no attempt to indicate them by references.

[25] In this terrible picture of Religious life at its lowest ebb, some
allowance must be made for the fervid imagination and righteous wrath
of the holy writer (“_quidam sanctus doctor hujus sanctae Paupertatis
professor et zelator strenuus_”). But even with sloth, gluttony,
intemperance, greed of gain, hypocrisy, and ungodliness running riot in
a whole Community, it is profitable to the historian to note that there
is not a hint of unchastity, the truth being that a Community wholly
unchaste is one of those rarities of history sought in the past, and
desired, I fear, by certain historians, but scarcely existing outside
the cruel inventions of interested despoilers. And lest any be amazed
that the Religious life should ever have fallen even half as low as
is here portrayed, let them remember that the higher the ideal, the
further the fall when it comes, and that the Lady Poverty has ever
punished her betrayers by the completest degradation.

[26] “Terribilis ut castrorum acies ordinata.” This occurs in the
Chapter at Prime in the Office of Our Lady, and hence it is here used
in connection with that other Lady, Madonna Povertà. The translator of
the “Meditazione,” finding it would have no associations in Italian (as
of course it has none in English), quietly drops it, but I cannot take
so great a liberty, nor allow myself to hide the vivid and touching
imagination which the pious author thus betrays. Throughout the whole
allegory the influence of the Liturgy is conspicuous.

[27] Regula S. Francisci, Cap. vi.

[28] “Non habebat aliud Christi pauper nisi duo minuta, corpus
scilicet, et animam, quod posset liberali charitate largiri.” Leg. Maj.
S. Bonav., Cap. ix.

[29] Romans viii. 28.

[30] Testament of St Francis.

[31] “Fioretti,” chap. xiii.

[32] _Vide_ “The Parable of Poverty,” Legenda III. Soc. Cap. xii.,
Bollandist Edition.

[33] Matthew v. 3.

[34] “Parochial Sermons”: _The Danger of Riches_.

[35] Scartazzini rejects the reading “salse” (“lezione priva di
autorità”), and adopts “pianse.” I hope, for the sake of Dante’s great
imagination, that he may be in the wrong. So competent an authority
as Mr Wicksteed adheres to “salse,” basing his reason on this very
prayer. See the “Paradise” of Dante Alighieri, translated by Philip H.
Wicksteed, Dent, 1899.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LADY POVERTY ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
